# SE 464

## Day 1

> What has been your experience with programming in the large? What is Software Architecture?

* Working on a large API system that has many clients and endpoints
* Working on car client features that have many systems to interact with

> What is Software Architecture?

* The conceptual fabric that defines a system
    - All architecture is design but not all design is architecture
* Architecture parts of a system that would be difficult to change once the system is built
* Architectures capture 3 dimenions:
    - Structure
    - Communication
    - Nonfunctional requirements
* Architecture is about:
    - Communication
    - What 'parts' are there?
    - How do the 'parts' fit together?
* Architecture is not about:
    -   Development
    -   Algorithms
    -   Data structures

#### Summary

* peer reviews are a thing
* architecture is high level and involves people
* software architecture is important

## Day 2

Steps of the design process:

1. Ideation
2. Analysis
   - Determine Criteria
   - Apply Criteria
3. Selection
4. Elaboration/Refinement
5. Iteration

What is Software Architecture?

> The conceptual fabric that defines a system
>
> *All architecture is design but not all design is architecture*

Components of Architecture:

- Structure
- Communication
- Interaction
- Nonfunctional requirements

>Architecture is the fundamental organization of a system, embodied in its components, their relationships to each other and the environment, and the principles governing its design and evolution

**Pricipal**: of imperative importance

**Prescriptive Architecture**: design decisions prior to system construction

**Descriptive Architecture**: describes how system has been built

> Ideally, as the system evolves we first think about how we change the prescriptive architecture, this does not always happen which is bad!

**Architectural Drift**: principle design decisions in the descriptive architecture that do not meet a need of the prescriptive architecture

**Architectural Erosion**: architectural drift that violates the prescriptive architecture

**Architectural Recovery**: determining a systems architecture from it's implmentation artifacts

**Architecture Elements**: components that make up the system, ex. Database

**Component**: encapusaltes a subset of the system, has an interface and dependcies

**Connector**: element that effects and regulates the interaction between components ex. procedure call

**Configuration**: a set of components and connectors that describe the system architecture



